[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> There are two
kinds of trauma.
There is simple trauma,
and there's complex trauma.
And complex trauma is
usually developmental trauma.
So an example of simple trauma
is somebody who's 25 years old,
they have a terrible car
crash and they're in hospital
for a long time.
It takes them a
great many months
to regain physical function,
and this shatters their lives
in some fundamental way.
That's a simple trauma.
A complex trauma is one
where there was abuse,
often as a child.
And if there's
developmental trauma
where you were beaten over
and over and over again
or where you were
being neglected,
whether you were being
raped, whether you
were being physically
assaulted and it was repeated,
and that's a different
kind of trauma,
because the brain is growing
while that trauma is happening.
And that information is
being installed at the level
of circuits in your brain.
It's not just a thought
or a belief or one event.
It is crucial, it is
fundamental to the actual way
your brain wired together.
For the first two years of
life, the fastest growing brain
region is the limbic system.
So the limbic system,
the emotional midbrain
is the fastest
growing brain region.
It's not a part of the
brain that has language.
That's Broca's area over
here behind our temple.
That has-- that's
the language part.
This is the center of our
brain, the emotional midbrain.
That's the fastest
growing part of our brain.
It has no language,
but it feels.
It feels deeply.
And so if you're
being traumatized
while that part of
your brain is growing,
then trauma is woven into
the neural fabric of the way
your brain structure is.
And so that kind of
trauma is hard to treat.
We find in trauma treatment,
manuals and approaches,
that simple trauma
is relatively easy.
But developmental
trauma, complex trauma
is hard to treat.
So how does that
person get through it?
And you can't easily get through
it using cognitive techniques,
using thought or
language based therapies.
I can't sit you in
a chair and say,
you shouldn't feel
that way, because it's
fundamental to the way
your brain functions.
So for example, there
was a famous psychiatrist
called Joseph Wolpe.
After World War
II, he was working
with veterans of World
War II, and these men,
for the most part
men, had shell shock.
They were dreadfully
affected by the war.
And he was a good
Freudian therapist.
So he laid them on a couch to
do the talking cure and said,
tell me about Omaha Beach.
[CHUCKLES]
And he wrote in
one of his books,
he said, he came
to the realization
after doing this with
those soldiers, he said,
that kind of therapy
is not ineffective.
It's harmful.
And a later term is
it's re-traumatizing
to remember the bad stuff, to
remember the pit bull attack,
remember the car accident,
remember your buddy was being
blown to bits on the beach.
By replaying that in your mind,
that thought, now stimulating
that emotion is actually
re-traumatizing you.
And as you fire those neural
circuits in your brain,
they wire together bigger
and bigger and bigger.
So we find, for example,
that stress circuits
like the amygdala grow in
people who have been traumatized
in that way, and
learning and memory
circuits, like those
in the hippocampus
actually shrink over time.
So we're doing brain
remodeling with our thoughts.
Our thoughts aren't just
producing some kind of emotion
or experience in our minds.
They're producing neural
tissue in our brains.
And if you start to use that
neural tissue over and over
again, then it becomes
hard to change.
So you can't use
cognitive techniques
for development trauma
or preverbal trauma.
You need energy techniques, and
we have huge numbers of them.
We have acupuncture, which
affects the flows of energy
in the body's meridians.
We have acupressure,
like EFT, where
you interrupt that thought and
that experience with pressure
or tapping on a point.
We have energy medicine,
energy psychology techniques.
And these work below
the level of thought.
They work at the level of
the body's energy system.
What we see, for
example, on MRI or EEG
scans is massive shifts in
the body's usage of energy.
As you shift the energy of the
body, then the form of the body
shifts as well.
EFT is a very simple technique.
It has you think about
something that bothers you.
Now when you think about
a thing that bothers you,
you're activating all the
circuits in your brain
that carry that information.
So you then have your brain
working in a certain way.
You have certain
circuits lit up.
If you think about
things that bother you
over and over and
over again, you
make those circuits bigger
and bigger and bigger.
But if you interrupt that
pattern with something else,
then you are able to
break that signaling,
and then your brain no
longer uses that circuit.
And the something else, in
case of EFT, is acupressure.
There are over 300 meridian
points on the body.
They're organized into
14 meridian lines.
And EFT has you apply
acupressure in the form
of fingertip tapping like this
to about 13 of those points--
there are seven in the preform
of EFT and 13 in the long form
of EFT--
as well as using eye movements.
And what you see in
people's EEGs and MRIs when
they do this is that
you first have them
think about the problem.
When they think
about the problem,
about the event in their
life, about the bomb blast,
about the car crash, about
the terrible divorce,
whatever it might be, you find
the emotional brain is all
lit up.
In an MRI or an EEG, you
see all this activity
in the emotional midbrain
when people start tapping,
it sends a second signal
to the brain of safety.
Because if you are
being chased by a tiger,
you would not be tapping.
[LAUGHS]
So now, the brain's
getting two inputs.
It's getting this signal
from your memory saying,
be stressed, be
stressed, be stressed,
danger, danger, danger, danger.
And so you have a second signal,
a somatic signal of soothing
in the form of tapping.
And it prioritizes that
soothing signal just the way
your mom when you were
crying, hopefully, as a baby,
she would stroke your face,
she would stroke your head,
she would touch you.
Touch is a fundamental safety
signal that we as animals,
as mammals understand.
Every animal understands touch.
So say your dog, every time
it sees a car coming by,
it just starts
barking and goes crazy
and gets really wildly excited,
goes into fight or flight
itself, runs after the car, and
you want to calm the dog down.
You can explain to the
dog really logically why
running after cars
is such a bad idea,
and it's likely to lead
to the dog's demise.
And you can get really
super clear with the dog
and paint a great
word picture of why
the dog shouldn't do that,
but that isn't going to work.
But if you stroke the dog,
that will calm the dog.
So the dog understands
touch in a way which
it doesn't understand language.
Same thing with us.
We-- our emotional
midbrains understand touch.
When a friend of
yours is crying,
you don't explain to them why
they shouldn't feel so bad.
You put your arm around them,
and touch will sooth them.
So EFT is stroking in a dog.
[LAUGHS] It calms the
emotional midbrain.
And it's really amazing.
On MRI scans, we have
people imagine a trauma,
their midbrain gets
all that up in the MRI.
We have them tap, it
just gets shut down.
Some people love yoga.
Some people prefer
Qigong or Tai Chi.
Some might prefer
martial arts or dance.
So same thing with therapy.
Some people respond really
well to cognitive therapies.
Others energy therapies.
Others hypnotherapy.
So you want to play around with
this whole beautiful bundle
of possibilities, and then find
the one that works for you.
Like someone said to me
once, tell me, Dawson, you've
done all this research,
you've looked at all
these different therapies.
Which is the best therapy?
I said, OK, I'll tell
you the best therapy.
The best therapy is the
one that works for you.
Another time someone
said to me, what's
the very best form
of meditation?
And I said, the best
form of meditation
is the one you
will do every day.
[CHUCKLES] So play around in
all these different techniques,
and then pick the one that
resonates with your energy
system, with your psyche, with
your history, with your body.
[MUSIC PLAYING]